Then we'll try it and see if it works. OK, this is Ron
Schorn interviewing Carl Sagan on October 19,
1993, at Boulder, Colorado. Now, Carl, for the
record, would you give us your full name? My name is
Carl Edward Sagan. OK, and when and where were you
born? November 9, 1934, Brooklyn, New York.
When did you first get interested in astronomy?
About age five.
What part of astronomy did you get interested in,
and how did that happen? I describe this in my book,
Cosmos, and it's done much better there than I can
do it here. It's chapter six, I think. Where did you
go to undergraduate school? I got all my earned
degrees, all four of them, at the University of
Chicago. When did you get your bachelor's degree?
I got a BA in 1954 and a BS in physics in 1955. Did you
ever take any astronomy classes as an
undergraduate? As an undergraduate,
no, I did not. Why did you go to Chicago? I went to
Chicago because it had the only planetary
astronomer in the United States and I wanted to do
planets. That was Gerard Kuiper and also because
the physics and chemistry departments were
extremely good. The names Enrico Fermi and Harold
Urey attracted me. But what I didn't realize is
that on showing up I was subjecting myself to the
Hutchins
baccalaureate program in which they said that my
showing up showed that I didn't know any subjects
and therefore it was up to them to tell me what to
study and so they had 14 year long courses that were
required for the bachelor's degree, which had
almost nothing to do with professional pursuit of
mathematics, physics, and astronomy. And it was
the best thing that ever happened to me because I
was too narrowly focused and it broadened me up.
You'll recall there was a little to-do about some
magazine you mentioned that Kuiper was the only
practicing planetary astrophysicist in the 50s
or whatever. And someone said, why did you say
that? And you said, because it's true. Could you
give us the details? Well, I learned this from
talking to other astronomers, which I did before
going to, you know, before applying. But, you
know, think about it. Who else was anything close
to full-time planetary astronomer in the United
States? At the time, not John Strong, Robert
Richardson at Mount Wilson. I just don't think
there were any others, but there was Kuiper. This
is 1951 I'm talking about. There was Kuiper. It
just edited the atmospheres of the Earth and
planets. discovered CO2 on Mars, methane on
Titan, was trying to understand the origin of the
solar system, was involved in theory and
observation, and was also not completely hostile
to the idea of life elsewhere. So he was going great
guns, and there was, as far as I know then or now,
nobody else. Were you aware that, let's put it this
way, at least some part of the astronomical
establishment, anywhere from half to 99%,
considered planetary astronomy a third-rate
field at that time? I can't remember if I was truly
aware of that at the time. I certainly became aware
of it quickly thereafter. The
people who I asked for advice, for example, Lyman
Spitzer at Princeton, did not think planetary
science was a third rate field, maybe in part
because Lyman had done some planetary science
himself. He was, for example, the source of the
then primary objection to the Jeans-Jeffries
view of the origin of the solar system by the close
encounter of two stars, and had also been doing
work on the escape of planetary atmospheres. So
maybe I had a biased sample, but in any case, by the
time I got to Chicago and talked to some of the
stellar astronomers there, it got across to me
very strongly. If I had known about it beforehand,
it wouldn't have affected me in the least, because
I knew exactly what I was interested in, and no
rational argument would have dissuaded me, much
less an irrational argument. So what was your
doctoral dissertation? My doctoral
dissertation was called Physical Studies of
Planets, which was very broad to encompass a bunch
of things. The main part of it by far was something
called the Radiation Balance of Venus, which was
an attempt to show that The high microwave
brightness temperature of Venus, as found by
Cornell Mayer and others, by ground-based radio
telescopes, had as its most natural explanation a
massive greenhouse effect. in which carbon
dioxide and water vapor played the main role. And
there were some subsidiary parts to it, one of
which was work I had done partly with Stanley
Miller on the radiation chemistry of a simulated
Jovian atmosphere in which we, I think it's the
first time anyone had done a laboratory study of a
Jovian atmosphere, in which we made simple
organic molecules almost all of which have now
been discovered on Jupiter. Who was your thesis
advisor? Kuiper. What was he like? That's a very
complicated question. No, the question is very
simple. It's a very complicated answer. For me, he
was, as far as the science goes, tremendously
stimulating, a source of information on
absolutely everything from the Tisserand
criterion in celestial mechanics to the
lifestyles of lichens. He was the first person I
ever saw given a fresh problem. to literally do a
back of the envelope calculation. I mean,
literally on the back of an envelope. And the power
of knowing enough first principles physics to
address a new problem just off the top of your head
and see if proposed solutions came anywhere close
was truly breathtaking to me. And this was before I
had seen it in any of my physics classes. I saw it in
Gerard's hands. And he was strongly supportive of
my interests, as strange as some of them were. I was
interested in extraterrestrial life, among
other things. He was... temperamental. He had his
quarrels with other scientists, but he was
entirely supportive of me, including finding
ways for me to supplement my income. And another
thing which I very much appreciate is that he did
not force a doctoral thesis on me. He let me
generate my own topics, which I, especially in
retrospect, very much appreciate.
I want to skip now because we don't have very much
time.
Well, I remember when the journal Icarus first
came out. It seemed to me it was full of mostly
celestial mechanics from former East Block
astronomers that I never heard of. And then you
became editor in the early 60s. How did that
happen? How did they talk you into it, or did you
talk yourself into it? No, no, I didn't talk myself
into it. I don't fully understand why Zdenek Kopal
and A.G. Wilson decided not to be editors anymore
or were asked by Academic Press not to be editors. I
just don't know that information, and I never
asked. But what I do know is I was asked to, they had
asked me to be an associate editor from the
beginning, and I was happy to do that. That was fun.
And I published a few papers in there. Did not do
anything in the way of editorial function. And
then they came to me together and asked if I would be
interested in replacing them as editor. I was
really quite young and very flattered. It seemed
to me to be a great thing to do, a wonderful way to
find out what's happening in the field, and I had
very definite ideas about how to improve the
journal, one of which was to have referees, which,
while not a novel idea in general, was novel for
Icarus. And for some reason, which I don't know, I
mean, I generally don't know, and it wasn't a thing
that I felt comfortable asking, I don't know why
they chose me. There was a feeling... a very strong
feeling among the few people who were doing
planetary astronomy at that time that the
astrophysical journal just didn't want to
publish any astronomy, and this held for radio
astronomy, too, planetary. And it held for radio
as well. My first publication was in the
Proceedings of the IRE.
So there was a definite need for Icarus. How did you
go about getting the papers? Okay, let me say, I
mean, I've heard this about APJ, but... My
experience was that, I mean, I sent a bunch of
papers to APJ in the 60s, and they were all refereed
and accepted, and there was one wild paper that
Russ Walker and I sent called On the Detectability
of Dyson Civilizations, which was also
published, so I never experienced that hostility
at APJ, but others have mentioned it, and I can't
make rhyme or reason of it. But as to how I solicited
papers for Icarus, well, you know, there was a
small number of people, and I said to them, look,
we're doing well. We're concentrating on
planetary science. Here is a journal in which you
find only planetary science papers, not diluted
by a vast array of papers on quite different
subjects. And there are no paid charges, and We
have glossy stock and that means we can print nice
renditions of photographs. And some papers I
solicited. I said to so-and-so, you know, you're
the right person to review this subject. It needs a
broad perspective. Why don't you do that for
Icarus?
But a lot of papers came unsolicited. And, you
know, as soon as a few good papers were published,
then other people noticed it. And it prospered.
There's a sort of exponential built into it. What
do you think the status of planetary astronomy is
today among quote real unquote astronomers?
Well, I think the degree of respectability has
improved dramatically. Nevertheless, there is
still the sense in many people's mind of
respectability being directly proportional to
distance or maybe to a high power of the distance of
the astronomical object examined. And since the
planets are nearby, they're considered
disreputable. In part, this is... I think due to
excesses by such people as Percival Lowell. But
it's a kind of snooty attitude, which I think is
best to simply avoid. I mean, just ignore. One
thing I noticed is that when the government
started spending large amounts of money on
planetary science, especially sending
spacecraft to the planets, the respectability of
planetary science made a... dramatic increment.
While you were editor of Vicarious, what fraction
of your time did you spend on the journal? It wasn't
vast. Maybe, I don't know, it's hard to estimate.
If I give very broad limits, I would say between 10
and 25 percent, something like that, and it varied
from month to month and year to year. I should say
that at a critical time, I had an the luck to have
Steve Soder as assistant editor, and that really
helped a lot. How did Icarus get to be the official
journal of the Division for Planetary Sciences,
the American Astronomical Society? Well, here
was Icarus just being published by a commercial
publisher, and here was DBS, which I had helped
found, having no journal affiliated with it. And
there were other institutions, professional
societies that had their journals, lots of them.
American Geophysical Union had Journal of
Geophysical Research and so on. It was such a
natural idea, and so I pushed it, and then there was
a time when I was president of the DPS, and I had a
chance to push it harder, and people saw the wisdom
of it, and nobody was trying to force any editorial
policy down people's... There's an appointed
advisory board that has a lot to say about what
happens. It was just an obvious marriage to be
made, and I had the pleasure of being the marriage
broker. What do you think is the current status and
the outlook for the near future for planetary
astronomy? Up, down, hanging in there. Planetary
astronomy or planetary science? Both. Well...
Um...
You know, it depends very much on funding. And
funding depends very much on Congress, and
Congress depends very much on the health of the
national economy and also the sense that
taxpayers have about this being something worth
spending money on. And all of these items are very
hard to predict.
The practical question is, If a bright, young,
motivated scientist comes to me starting
graduate school and says, I want to be a planetary
scientist, would you recommend that I do it or not?
I still, by and large, recommend that they do it.
It's just the situation that all astronomy
graduates do. Well, that's true. That's
absolutely right, and certainly the number,
absolute number of jobs available today is vastly
more than it was in the 50s in any kind of astronomy.
But still, if you thought the thing was headed
towards some free-fall collapse, you wouldn't
recommend that students pursue their interest
there. I don't think we're in desperate straits,
although it's very hard when you don't know about
continuity of funding and all sorts of programs
started and stopped seemingly whimsically. It's
very tough, especially for the younger people. If
you have tenure or you've been successful in
research programs, you have some likelihood of
continuity but young people don't and the thing
i'm most worried about is not the older folks but
uh... but the really young people there are more
worried that we're we're not we're not preserving
our options for the future uh... as we ought you
think that uh... planetary scientists or and
planetary astronomers have done a good job in
selling themselves to the public and to the
congress No and no. I think that planetary
missions have done an excellent job of selling
planetary science to the public and the Congress.
Of course, in the context of the Cold War, many
people understood each planetary mission
triumph as another way that we beat the Russians.
And that put a particular... skew to public
appreciation. But despite that, I think
understanding these missions for their own sake,
for their true merit, did get through. Now
that we have lots of improved visual techniques,
including false color photography and
virtual reality movies in which we dive down to a
planetary surface, we have extraordinary tools
to interest the public in what we do, which I still
think we don't use adequately enough. And I think
many scientists, if the funding dried up, would
suddenly say, oh my goodness, I wish we had spent
more time on popularizing what we do with the
general public. What impact, if any, do you think
the fact that we haven't found any traces of life
anywhere else in the solar system, and in
particular not on Mars, what effect, if any, do you
think that's had on funding?
I don't think it's had any perceptible effect on
funding. If you look at the NASA expenditures for
robotic missions, you see a big blip for Viking.
But if you subtract, which I think is attributable
to the interest in the search for life, but apart
from that, it's reasonably flat. So I don't think
there was a depression after Viking. We just
returned to where we were in any case. And I think if
NASA had had the courage to follow up Viking with
further searches for life or life-oriented
understanding of the past environment of Mars,
they could have maintained the Viking blip. This
is a different sort of a question. The former
Soviet Union had a lot of people called
astronomers and space scientists and all this,
and they really didn't do much. Do you have an
opinion as to why? Yeah, because they were living
in the former Soviet Union. I mean, you know, you
can criticize that some people didn't get a good
education and there wasn't adequate peer review
knowledge. especially with people who were
politically connected. And Soviet scientists
weren't willing to criticize each other in
international forums for patriotic reasons and
all of that. But the fundamental reason, I
believe, is that the living conditions were
impossibly hard. And I was continually amazed
when we go over there to see the circumstances in
which not just any astronomers, the best
astronomers were living in. I remember seeing the
little... alcove that Shklovsky and P. Kellner
and Kaplan had to share at the...
Sorry, I've forgotten the Astronomical
Institute of the University of Moscow. It's named
after somebody. Sternberg. The Sternberg
Astronomical Institute. And that was very good
conditions compared to living arrangements,
standing in line for food and all of that. It is
remarkable that anything was accomplished by
Soviet astronomers. What do you think is the best
piece of work you've done so far? I tend not to try to
pick out bests and worsts.
Maybe one thing that I'm pleased about is that my
interest in the search for life elsewhere led me to
all sorts of things completely unconnected with
life. In trying to understand the habitability of
Venus, I was drawn irresistibly to the conclusion
that the surface was far too hot for life. And in
trying to understand the seasonal changes on
Mars, which had been widely attributed to the
growth and seasonal decay of vegetation, I was led
irresistibly to windblown dust. So I guess one
thing I'm pleased about is that my interest in
extraterrestrial life did not prevent me, in fact
led me to a wide range of other subjects with quite
different physics. Look at the difference
between eolian transport and
greenhouse radiative balance and search for
life. They're quite different. But I've done a
whole lot of things, and some of them I'm very
pleased with, and others I wish I had done better
on. I may have asked you this, but I'll ask again. Do
you think planetary astronomy is part of
astronomy? Sure. Sure. And... And you might say
that spacecraft make it somewhat
non-astronomical. If you can fly to orbit, land on
a world, then why would you spend any time peering
at it through a ground-based telescope? And to a
large extent, that's true. But there are lots of
worlds we can't fly to or can't fly to often. And we
are shortly going, I think very likely, going to be
examining planets around other stars that we
surely are not going to be flying to shortly. And
that means that ground-based and
near-Earth-based planetary science is going to
be with us for a very long time. And that kind of
science is a part of astronomy. What's the role of
NASA Money Bin in resurrecting what was
essentially a dead field? Absolutely
fundamental. NASA, as far as funding goes and
other kinds of support, never mind space
missions. Just on the ground-based end of things
and the theoretical end of things and the
laboratory simulation end of things has been
absolutely essential in the renaissance of this
field. And then if you add this astonishing
capability that we now have to go to other planets
and see what they're like, NASA's role is key,
central, and historic for all the
arteriosclerotic problems with NASA these days.
What's your opinion of how NSA manages the
planetary program? I mean, do they micromanage?
Do they do about the right thing? Again, a personal
view. There's so many aspects, and it's been so
variable over the years, it's really hard to give a
one-bit yes or no answer. I would say that given the
existing funding constraints, NASA has not been
orders of magnitude too generous or too
impecunious. If you ask me whether it's made wrong
decisions and failed to see something which was
tremendously promising or spent lots of money on
something which was a dead end or scientifically
not very exciting, of course that's happened.
It's happened a lot, perhaps too much. But
overall, I think for all its flaws, NASA's done a
fantastic job in the support of planetary
science.